
Bayesian networks or directed graphical models are widely used to represent
complex causal systems. From observational data alone, a Bayesian network can
only be identified up to Markov equivalence and interventional experiments are
required to distinguish between Markov equivalent Bayesian networks. It is
therefore important to describe and understand the set of Markov equivalence
classes (MECs) and their sizes. In this paper, we initiate the combinatorial
enumeration of MECs on a fixed undirected graph, and thereby recast this
important statistical problem into the language of combinatorial optimization.
Combinatorially, two Bayesian networks are Markov equivalent if their
underlying undirected graphs and their set of immoralities are the same. We
show that the NP-complete Minimum Vertex Cover problem reduces to the
computation of a Bayesian network with the maximum number of immoralities. The
NP-hardness of this problem shows the complexity of enumerating MECs from the
perspective of combinatorial optimization. We then solve this enumeration
problem for classically studied families of graphs including paths, cycles, and
some types of complete bipartite graphs, trees, and circulants. We also provide
tight bounds on the number and size of MECs on a given tree. These bounds
exactly parallel the well-known bounds for the independent set problem.
Finally, a computer program was written to analyze the enumeration problem on
all graphs with at most 10 nodes and all triangle-free graphs with at most $12$
nodes. The results show a trade-off between degree and clustering coefficient
with respect to the number of MECs and their sizes. In addition, this program
established that the frequency vector consisting of the number of MECs of each
size uniquely determines the undirected graph.
