
This research aims to identify strong structural features of real-world
complex networks, sufficient to enable a host of graph algorithms that are much
more efficient than what is possible for general graphs (and currently used for
network analysis). Specifically, we study the property of bounded expansion.
This is the strongest formalization of the well-observed notion of "sparsity"
that might possibly apply to real-world networks and allow many previously
intractable problems to become tractable. On the theoretical side, we analyze
many previously proposed models for random networks and characterize which ones
have bounded expansion. We show that, w.h.p., (1) graphs sampled with either
the Molloy-Reed configuration model (including a variation of the model which
achieves high clustering) or the Chung-Lu model with a prescribed sparse degree
sequence (including heavy-tailed degree distributions); (2) perturbed
bounded-degree graphs; (3) stochastic block models with small probabilities;
result in graphs of bounded expansion. We also prove that the Kleinberg model
and the Barabasi-Albert model, in typical setups, contain large
one-subdivisions of cliques and thus do not result in graphs of bounded
expansion. On the practical side, we give experimental evidence that many
complex networks have bounded expansion, by measuring the closely related "low
treedepth coloring number" on a corpus of real-world data. On the algorithmic
side, we show how tools provided by the bounded expansion framework can be used
to efficiently solve the following common network analysis problems: for a
fixed graph H, we obtain the fastest-known algorithm for counting the number of
induced H-subgraphs and the number of H-homomorphisms; and we design linear
algorithms for computing several centrality measures.
